like here we are nine months in you and
I last talked in December yep when you
had some optimism there we were talking
about how there is there was a forgotten
worker a little bit people are yearning
to get back to work and I think we
thought I tell you I thought I thought
we were gonna have a big infrastructure
bill already passed and we would just
see an attempt to put some folks back to
work
are you disappointed we're not there yet
yeah I think I am a little bit but I'm
not I'm not shocked because the thing I
noticed about the last administration
that actually does have something in
common with this one is the kind of
there's a tendency to talk about job
creation as if there's a giant trained
workforce standing by waiting to fill
jobs that get created I wrote to the
last president modestly right after his
inauguration not long after my
foundation started just to say look the
idea that three million shovel-ready
jobs are going to be created sounds
great but from what I've seen our
country does have a bit of a
dysfunctional relationship with regard
to the shovel
so before we just say poof here are the
jobs we need to talk about the
aspirational element and the practical
reality of whether anybody is standing
by to do the work today I'm still saying
the same thing you know if you're gonna
throw a trillion dollars into
infrastructure it kind of presupposes
the idea that you've got a trained
workforce standing by to do those jobs
we don't and that to me is the most
interesting disconnect in the whole
dialogue when you say a trained
workforce I think people here they're at
different things right Silicon Valley
CEOs are thinking hey I need these I
need more engineers any more stem type
education for these folks
science technology things like that got
to hire others say no we need some you
know skills training for physical work
is it is it all of that or what are you
saying specifically that we have this
skills gap in well it's a fascinating
acronym
stem and if you just want to riff on
that for a second I've I've talked with
people who are focused on turning stem
into steam by putting the a back into it
right the Industrial Arts used to be the
arts you know the way you get shop out
of high school is to are betrothed the
art out of it so the Industrial Arts
goes to vote tech low tech goes to shop
shop gets eliminated next thing you know
we've got real deficits in those areas
other people like me we're arguing for
stems put the extra s on the end for
skill because for all the science
technology engineering and math that you
want to celebrate if you don't have the
practical skill to apply those things
it's just theory so we can have fun with
the language but the bigger point is
yeah that you have to have the art in
stem you have to have the skill in stem
and if you don't give them all equal
weight you're going to wind up on the
other end creating a lopsided workforce
that's what we have now 6.2 million jobs
are available as you and I speak a vast
majority of them don't require four-year
degree so why are we still talking as if
the best path for the most people is the
most expensive path it just doesn't add
up
I was just what are you thinkin echt
because they're about I think 7 million
unemployed for the 6.2 million unfilled
jobs right is it is this an issue I've
had a theory that one of the problems we
have over the last generation is we've
we've lacked domestic migration you know
what's great if there's no jobs
go you know I've got a I got an uncle of
mine in Arkansas and he had a friend
looking for work so he went up to North
Dakota and he found great work but many
people didn't do that over the last 10
years we have become curiously and
distressingly sedentary and you're
absolutely right when we talk about the
numbers the thing we always leave off is
the geography because again we kind of
presuppose that people will go to where
the work is I don't know when that
became enough
but it did and so in terms of
expectations that aren't realistic now
among them is not merely the
availability of the job of my dreams not
merely the availability of a job that
pays me what I believe is fair but the
existence of that job in my zip code
that's where things really and truly do
fall apart I I can't imagine how this
country was actually colonized and
settled but for an unapologetic love
affair with mobility where that went
I do not know automation it's something
that I I can tell you I I talked to
folks who are afraid of this not for
themselves for their kids because they
just they are scared there aren't going
to be good middle-class jobs in the next
20 years between look at what's
happening in the retail sector and if we
really have automated drivers and you
get rid of driving as a job what kind of
crisis are we facing in the next
generation Mike well if in fact that's
how we set the table I would say the
crisis is real and large but I don't
think it's gonna happen and I'm not an
expert but I think you're talking about
something an old professor of mine
called the displacement theory and in
our industry it basically said that that
that radio was going to displace
newspapers and that cinema was going to
displace radio and the TV was going to
displace cinema and that the internet
was good it doesn't it changes it so I
do think they're going to be middle
class jobs 20 years from now I just
don't know what they're going to be I
also don't think you and I are going to
live to see the day where we glance up
and see a driverless truck going down
Interstate 95 there might be a driver
sitting behind the wheel who's not
touching the wheel or the controls but
there's going to be a driver in that cab
and there's going to be a pilot in that
plane so I think with regard to AI which
incidentally you and I know we're
talking about artificial intelligence
but in the dirty jobs days when I
pitched an AI story it came back as our
official insemination and that's
outdated a look well I mean both a eyes
have been around for a long time and you
know technology will absolutely inform
and change everything we do but I I
don't think we can look forward and
conclude with certainty that the robots
are gonna take our jobs I'm just I'm
just skeptical of it yeah there you go
I'm that makes me optimistic final
question when when you were here last
time you said you know the country needs
a good PR campaign on work simply that
that people that there's a lack of
appreciation of it perhaps lack of
particularly on physical labor that's
something you're found a you you've said
you wanted to do with your foundation
but is it something that this president
should do absolutely positively
unreservedly yeah every president needs
to do that in your earlier segments you
were talking about leadership from the
top and that's it look there was a great
moment when the president was in the
room with some heads of manufacturing a
couple of months ago and he said that
we're going to bring these jobs back you
know which always sounds great nobody's
got any truck with that but a couple of
the CEOs were like mr. president we got
the jobs they're here what we need are
people who were enthused about learning
the skills that are actually in demand
so yeah my foundation was formed
Labor Day 2008 we're celebrating our our
ninth anniversary this year and the
message hasn't changed a bit the skills
gap has gotten wider but you very kindly
described me earlier as a champion of
blue collar work what I really AM is a
it's an addict I'm a dependent on it I'm
addicted to smooth roads and indoor
plumbing and reliable heating and air
conditioning 300 million other people
are too
we got a week it's time for Houston get
to Texas we need a lot we got a lot of
work down there wait until you see what
happens in the next year the tradesmen
don't exist down there right now that's
really where the where the shortage is
most keen the only way that city is
gonna get built back is through a huge
migration that you mentioned before of
skilled labor and what kind of problems
and challenges that creates elsewhere
stay tuned
interesting
to watch their micro always a pleasure
great to check in with you you
Chuck don't forget my podcast next time
yes sir in fact right here the man who
did all any jobs has another one cluding
a podcast you don't get to see the cool
hat though when he's though when you're
listening to podcast
hey there are Mercedes from MSNBC thanks
for watching MSNBC on YouTube if you
want to keep up to date with the videos
we're putting out you can click
subscribe just below me or click over on
this list to see lots of other great
videos